OOPs (Object-Oriented Programming) is a programming approach where we organize a program using classes and objects.
(To organize large programs,To reuse code,To make code easier to understand and maintain
To provide data security using concepts like encapsulation,To reduce code duplication)
1. Class
A class is a blueprint used to create objects.
2. Object
An object is an instance of a class.
3. Attributes
Attributes are variables that store the data/state of an object.
4. Methods
Methods are functions defined inside a class that describe the behaviour of an object.
5. Inheritance
Inheritance means acquiring the properties and methods of one class into another class.
The existing class is called the parent/base class.
The new class is called the child/derived class.
Types of Inheritance
There are mainly 5 types you should know in Python.
Single Inheritance,multilevel,multi,hybrid,Hierarchical
6. Polymorphism
Polymorphism means "many forms."
The same method/function name can behave differently depending on the object.
7. Abstraction
Abstraction means hiding unnecessary implementation details and showing only the essential information to the user.
8. Data Security – Encapsulation
For data security, an important OOP concept is encapsulation.
Encapsulation means wrapping data and methods together inside a class and controlling access to the data.
--> pass → Empty Class
pass is used when you want to create a class without writing anything inside it yet.
Attributes:
-->Class Attributes
A class attribute is a variable defined inside the class but outside methods.
-->Instance Attributes
An instance attribute is a variable that belongs to a particular object.
Different objects can have different values.
-->self refers to the current object/instance that is calling the method.
-->cls is used with a class method.(refers to current class)
-->Method Types in Python OOPs
There are 3 main types of methods:
1. Instance Method
Uses self
Works with object data
Most commonly used method
2. Class Method
Uses cls
Works with class data
Uses @classmethod
3. Static Method
Uses neither self nor cls
Used for simple/general operations
Uses @staticmethod
Static = independent method
Day-26
constructor=In programming, a constructor is a special method that is automatically called when an object of a class is created.
